README.adoc, before:

= SUN CG14 VESA Mod
Malte Dehling <mdehling@gmail.com>

:imagesdir: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/1k5/cg14-vesa-mod/main/img/

:url-framebuffer-faq: http://www.sunhelp.org/faq/FrameBuffer.html
:url-SUNWddk: https://archive.org/details/sun-ddk-v2.6/
:url-dM-fcunc: git://git.rodents-montreal.org/fcunc/
:url-sslx-vesa-mod: https://github.com/1k5/sslx-vesa-mod


The CG14 / SX is the onboard framebuffer in the SPARCstation 20 and the (rare)
SPARCstation 10SX.  The goal of this project is to modify the CG14 FCode and
add additional video modes, in particular modes suitable for use with modern
LCD displays.

This repository contains images of the SPARCstation 20 PROM v2.25 and v2.25r
and the extracted CG14 FCode, which turns out to be identical in both cases.


The OpenBoot PROM
-----------------
Here is an overview of the relevant parts of the OBP v2.25 and v2.25r PROMs.
As mentioned above, the CG14 FCode in both is identical.

.SPARCstation 20 PROM layout v2.25
[%autowidth]
|===
| Start   | Length | End     | Description

| 0x299a0 | 0x013c | 0x29adc | sbus@e fcode: SUNW,DBRIe
| 0x29ae0 | 0x4ba0 | 0x2e680 | sbus@f fcode: espdma esp sd st ledma le mmcodec
| 0x2e680 | 0xc3bc | 0x3aa3c | CG14 FCode
| 0x3ac40 | 0x24d8 | 0x3d118 | console font
|===

.SPARCstation 10/20 PROM layout v2.25r
[%autowidth]
|===
| Start   | Length | End     | Description

| 0x29d08 | 0x2ca4 | 0x2c9ac | sbus@f fcode: espdma esp
| 0x2c9b0 | 0x0158 | 0x2cb08 | sbus@e fcode: SUNW,DBRIe
| 0x2cb08 | 0x4bfc | 0x31704 | sbus@f fcode: espdma esp sd st ledma le mmcodec
| 0x31708 | 0x013c | 0x31844 | sbus@e fcode: SUNW,DBRIe
| 0x31848 | 0xc3bc | 0x3dc04 | CG14 FCode
| 0x3e008 | 0x24d8 | 0x404e0 | console font
|===


The CG14 FCode
--------------
The file link:ss20-cg14.fcode[] contains the CG14 FCode extracted from the
PROM.  I detokenized the FCode using a combination of both SUNs detokenizer and
_der Mouse_'s.  The resulting file `ss20-cg14.fth` when tokenized using SUNs
tokenizer reproduces the binary FCode exactly.

Looking at the forth source, it seems that the CG14 uses the same ICS1562 _User
Programmable Clock Generator_ as the onboard CG6 in the SPARCstation LX and the
TurboGX+ SBUS cards.  Check out my {url-sslx-vesa-mod}[SPARCstation LX VESA
Mod] Project if you're interested in understanding how to add new timings and
video modes.

The file link:ss20-cg14-vesa.fth[] contains a few modifications to add (nearly)
VESA video modes 1280x1024x60, 1600x1200x60, and 1920x1200x60, and the 162MHz
and 193MHz pixel clocks they require.  The files link:ss20-2.25-vesa.bin[] and
link:ss20-2.25r-vesa.bin[] are the patched PROM images for OBP v2.25 and
v2.25r, respectively.

WARNING:  I have _not tested_ these yet since I don't currently have a VSIMM
for my SPARCstation 20.  I hope to get one soon and will update when I do.  If
you do try these out, please let me know how it goes!


The Logos
---------
The CG14 comes with 3 built-in logos:

image:cg14-logo0.png["CG14 Logo 0"]
image:cg14-logo1.png["CG14 Logo 1"]
image:cg14-logo2.png["CG14 Logo 2"]


References
----------
{url-framebuffer-faq}::
        The SUN Framebuffer FAQ.

{url-SUNWddk}::
        Here you can find the SUNWfcode package used for (de)tokenizing.

link:{url-dM-fcunc}[]::
	Der Mouse's FCode uncompiler.

{url-sslx-vesa-mod}::
	My SPARCstation LX VESA Mod Project.  It contains a lot more
	information that I chose not to repeat here.

Commit message:

Add notes on OS compatibility

README.adoc, after:

= SUN CG14 VESA Mod
Malte Dehling <mdehling@gmail.com>

:imagesdir: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/1k5/cg14-vesa-mod/main/img/

:url-framebuffer-faq: http://www.sunhelp.org/faq/FrameBuffer.html
:url-SUNWddk: https://archive.org/details/sun-ddk-v2.6/
:url-dM-fcunc: git://git.rodents-montreal.org/fcunc/
:url-sslx-vesa-mod: https://github.com/1k5/sslx-vesa-mod


The CG14 / SX is the onboard framebuffer in the SPARCstation 20 and the (rare)
SPARCstation 10SX.  The goal of this project is to modify the CG14 FCode and
add additional video modes, in particular modes suitable for use with modern
LCD displays.

This repository contains images of the SPARCstation 20 PROM v2.25 and v2.25r
and the extracted CG14 FCode, which turns out to be identical in both cases.


Compatibility
-------------
Before you get too excited and do anything, read this section first to make
sure you know what you can expect out of this mod.

I will expand this section soon with photos and more details.  Just some short
notes for now:

- Solaris' cgfourteen driver keeps an internal table of admissable pixel clocks
  and resolutions and needs to be patched.  This part is easy.  However, the
  Xsun server crashes and I have no clue why exactly and how to fix it.

- NetBSD 9.2 boots fine.  The Xorg 'xf86-video-suncg14' driver implements only
  24-bit support.  I have patched it to add 8-bit support and Xorg works fine
  at 1920x1200x60 in 8-bit mode with a 4MB VSIMM.  Now hardware acceleration
  for now!


The OpenBoot PROM
-----------------
Here is an overview of the relevant parts of the OBP v2.25 and v2.25r PROMs.
As mentioned above, the CG14 FCode in both is identical.

.SPARCstation 20 PROM layout v2.25
[%autowidth]
|===
| Start   | Length | End     | Description

| 0x299a0 | 0x013c | 0x29adc | sbus@e fcode: SUNW,DBRIe
| 0x29ae0 | 0x4ba0 | 0x2e680 | sbus@f fcode: espdma esp sd st ledma le mmcodec
| 0x2e680 | 0xc3bc | 0x3aa3c | CG14 FCode
| 0x3ac40 | 0x24d8 | 0x3d118 | console font
|===

.SPARCstation 10/20 PROM layout v2.25r
[%autowidth]
|===
| Start   | Length | End     | Description

| 0x29d08 | 0x2ca4 | 0x2c9ac | sbus@f fcode: espdma esp
| 0x2c9b0 | 0x0158 | 0x2cb08 | sbus@e fcode: SUNW,DBRIe
| 0x2cb08 | 0x4bfc | 0x31704 | sbus@f fcode: espdma esp sd st ledma le mmcodec
| 0x31708 | 0x013c | 0x31844 | sbus@e fcode: SUNW,DBRIe
| 0x31848 | 0xc3bc | 0x3dc04 | CG14 FCode
| 0x3e008 | 0x24d8 | 0x404e0 | console font
|===


The CG14 FCode
--------------
The file link:ss20-cg14.fcode[] contains the CG14 FCode extracted from the
PROM.  I detokenized the FCode using a combination of both SUNs detokenizer and
_der Mouse_'s.  The resulting file `ss20-cg14.fth` when tokenized using SUNs
tokenizer reproduces the binary FCode exactly.

The CG14 uses the same ICS1562 _User Programmable Clock Generator_ as the
onboard CG6 in the SPARCstation LX and the TurboGX+ SBUS cards.  Check out my
{url-sslx-vesa-mod}[SPARCstation LX VESA Mod] Project if you're interested in
understanding how to add new timings and video modes.

The file link:ss20-cg14-vesa.fth[] contains a few modifications to add (nearly)
VESA video modes 1280x1024x60, 1600x1200x60, and 1920x1200x60, and the 162MHz
and 193MHz pixel clocks they require.  The files link:ss20-2.25-vesa.bin[] and
link:ss20-2.25r-vesa.bin[] are the patched PROM images for OBP v2.25 and
v2.25r, respectively.


The Logos
---------
The CG14 comes with 3 built-in logos:

image:cg14-logo0.png["CG14 Logo 0"]
image:cg14-logo1.png["CG14 Logo 1"]
image:cg14-logo2.png["CG14 Logo 2"]


References
----------
{url-framebuffer-faq}::
        The SUN Framebuffer FAQ.

{url-SUNWddk}::
        Here you can find the SUNWfcode package used for (de)tokenizing.

link:{url-dM-fcunc}[]::
	Der Mouse's FCode uncompiler.

{url-sslx-vesa-mod}::
	My SPARCstation LX VESA Mod Project.  It contains a lot more
	information that I chose not to repeat here.
